foreign secretary Lord Cameron has
announced that the US UK and partners
will open a maritime Corridor to deliver
Aid directly to Gaza but he said that he
would continue to urge Israel to allow
more trucks into Gaza as the fastest way
to get Aid to those who need it his full
tweet says people in Gaza are in
Desperate humanitarian need alongside
the US the UK and partners have we have
announced we will open a maritime
Corridor to deliver Aid directly to Gaza
he goes on to say we continue to urge
Israel to allow more trucks into Gaza as
the fastest way to get Aid to those who
need it this comes as the EU
commissioning Chief Ursula Vine is set
to make a statement this hour and she is
visiting Cyprus for the launch of that
humanitarian sea Corridor now this was
all announced as part of President
Biden's State of the Union Address last
night he confirmed that he has ordered
the UK military to build a temporary
Pier off the coast of Gaza now he said
it would ensure a massive increase in
aid for Palestinians now that Aid is
likely to go through Cyprus so the
details we still don't have in full but
we are expecting some sort of port to be
built into Gaza and that will be fed
into Gaza from Cyprus so that is what we
are looking at at the moment but we've
had confirmation that the UK is going to
be part of that operation that President
Biden announced also that we expect the
EU to be part of that because the eu's
Ura V line is visiting Cyprus a little
bit later to talk about that
humanitarian Corridor that we expect to
go from Cyprus it will then go to this
port that the US are building off Gaza
now now in his State of the Union speech
overnight President Biden as I said
confirmed that he had ordered the US
military to build that temporary Pier
off the coast of Gaza he said it would
ensure a massive increase in aid for
Palestinians he warned Israel that
humanitarian assistance should never be
used as a bargaining chip now let's
listen in to Ursula Von line who we are
expecting to speak very shortly in
Cyprus um this is at the moment uh the
cypriate um uh PE uh ministers there who
are just building up to ur veline uh who
is going to speak at this event in
Cyprus um it is all part as you can see
the Cypress Maritime Corridor behind
there so what is happening is it was
announced by Mr Biden that the US was
going to build a temporary Pier off the
coast of Gaza we've then in the last
hour had that tweet from the British
foreign secretary Lord Cameron saying
that the UK is going to be one of those
Partners that's going to build that
Maritime Corridor and now we are seeing
as part of this coordinated effort very
shortly Ursula Von deline is going to
speak in Cyprus but first let's have a
listen to what President Biden said
about building that pier in his State of
the Union Address last night our
protecting and saving innocent lives has
to be a priority as we look to the
Future
the only real solution to the situation
is a two-state solution over
[Music]
time and I say
this as a lifelong supporter of Israel
my entire career no one has a stronger
record with Israel than I do I challenge
any of you here I'm the only American
president of is Israel in war time but
there is no other path that guarantees
Israel security and democracy there's no
other path that guarantees Palestinian
can live in peace with with peace and
dignity so let us take you back to the
scene live in Cyprus where we are
expecting the EU commission Chief Ursula
Von deline to speak very shortly as you
can see it's all part of this concerted
effort to bring humanitarian Aid in to
Gaza via the sea let us listen into what
the cypriots are saying at the moment
Ursula Madame President you were and I
remember this very well you were a stunt
vocal supporter of the Cyprus Maritime
corridor from the very beginning thank
you for your vision and your leadership
Cyprus is deeply appreciative of the
full support by you personally by the
European commission as well as that of
the United Arab Emirates the United
States and other partners with whom we
have been in intense consultations in
the last weeks and months at the same
time the UN special coordinator and her
important mandate to coordinate increase
and standardize the humanitarian
assistance going into Gaza are also
important elements in making the
corridor a sustained long-term Maritime
Lifeline for the civilians in
Gaza Today We Stand United by a common
Vision to alleviate the humanitarian
tragedy of the civilians in Gaza here at
the Joint rescue coordination Center
which constitutes an integral facility
of the critical infrastructures in the
Amalia plan the other critical facility
in the Amalia capsule is cyclopes the
Center for Land open seas and Port
security established in close
cooperation with the United States here
at the jrcc where we also monitor all
sea traffic going in and out of Cyprus
as we have discuss the number of
migrants from Syria and lebano have been
consistently increasing in recent months
which is deeply concerning for for
Cyprus I look forward to working with
you also on this Ursula and just as we
are doing today to do so in a result
oriented manner
with the president I also discussed this
morning our efforts to resume
negotiations on the Cyprus problem in
line with the relevant un Security
Council resolutions and the European
Union law values and principles a
solution to the Cyprus problem will have
a resounding Regional impact as well we
agree that the European Union can be a
driver for developments on the Cyprus
question and in this regard got we
exchange views on the state of play in
EU turkey relations in which the Cyprus
question is of course a core component
part dear Ula once again it is a great
pleasure to host you and your team to
Cyprus in order to deliver the
implementation of the Amal initiative of
the maritime Corridor for the delivery
of eight in Gaza our journey only just
begins welcome thank you thank you very
much Mr President de Nikas thank you
very much for welcoming me and my team
here to laka and in particular to the
Joint rescue coordination
Center we're here because Palestinians
and in particular those in
Gaza um need all our
help the humanitarian situation in Gaza
is
dire with Innocent Palestinian families
and children desperate for basic
needs and today we are facing a
humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza and we
stand by the innocent civilians in
Palestine and this is why Europe is
financing a major humanitarian Aid
effort for
Palestinians in Gaza and in the region
250 million EUR this year alone but the
key challenge
is to get the aid to the people on the
ground in Gaza and we know the
difficulties faced at the land borders
in GAA be it through the ruer border
crossing or through the Jordan Road
Corridor and that is why today the
Republic of Cyprus the European
commission the United Arab Emirates and
the United States of course supported by
other critical partners announced our
intent to open the maritime Corridor to
deliver much needed additional amounts
of humanitary assistance by
SE together our Nations intent to build
on this model to deliver significant
additional Aid by SE so I am extremely
grateful to you Mr President de Nikos
and to the people of Cyprus for your
leadership in establishing the Amala
initiative it was impressive to see and
to visit the different sites how it um
is evolving supplementing the efforts to
deliver significant additional
Aid we are launching this cypris
Maritime Corridor together Cyprus the
European Union the United Arab Emirates
and the United States and it is your
Relentless work to get this Corridor up
and running despite all all the
challenges and this is truly
inspiring we're now very close to the
opening of the corridor hopefully this
Saturday this Sunday and I'm very glad
to see that an initial pilot operation
will be launched
today thus um it is the partnership that
started it today with the world Central
Kitchen whom I want to thank
wholeheartedly for their viess and so
important
work Mr President inos Cyprus has always
been a bridge between Europe and the
Middle East and thanks to the Amalia
initiative it is proving this historical
role once again
today I welcome the leadership of
President Nikos Christo does by serving
as a mediator for all parties
involved and I would like to commend the
particular effort of the president of
the United Arab Emirates muhamed bin
Zayed to mobilize support to activate
this Corridor by securing the first of
many shipments of goods to the people of
North
Gaza and I call on all the actors who
have a role to play here to help this
cor deliver on its potential one thing
is for sure you can count on us the
maram corridor can make a real diff
difference in the plight of the
Palestinian
people but in parallel our efforts to
provide assistance to Palestinians
through all possible routs of course
will
continue as part of our EU humanitarian
airbridge
operation we have launched 41
flights carrying over
1,800 tons of
a and we will consider consider all
other options including air drops if our
humanitarian Partners on the ground
consider this
effective but our action does not stop
there we must also focus our Attention
our efforts and Outreach on preventing
an ignition of violence across the whole
region I am in regular contact with
President Alisia of Egypt and King
abdalah of
Jordan the situation in the Red Sea is
particularly
concerning with Maritime security
deteriorating day after day and critical
infrastructure damaged due to the
repeated hooti
attacks this is why we have launched the
EU Naval Force operation
aspas and I know that Cyprus has
deployed two naval officers for this
Mission and we really thank you for that
Mr Mr
President with as
speedis Europe is acting to ensure
freedom of navigation in the Red Sea
working alongside with our International
Partners finally a word on the day
after we agree that we must start
preparing today with a viable
perspective and this perspective
continues to lie in the two- State
solution this requires an immediate
humanitarian pause that would lead to a
sustainable
ceasefire it is clear that there can be
no forced displacement of Palestinians
and no blocket of
Gaza but it is equally clear that Gaza
cannot be a safe heaven for terrorists
and that we will keep on calling for the
immediate unconditional release of all
hostages held by
Hamas Europe will continue to help build
momentum for this political
Horizon so thank you again Mr President
de Nikos and I want to thank everyone
working here at the
jrcc you will play an Central role in
the Amala initiative you are already
playing an important and Central role
overall in the region here so something
comes on top of your
responsibility you embody Europe solidar
ity at its best and I know that the
people of Cyprus themselves know what
suffering and loss can feel like and
therefore we in the European Union Stand
By You Mr President in your efforts to
resume the peace talks for the solution
of the Cypress question here too you can
count on us many thanks
thanks thank
you so that is the EU commission
president and the President of Cyprus in
lanica at the launch of what is a
humanitarian Aid corridor from Cyprus
into Gaza now the EU commission Chief
Ursula Vine at the launch of that sea
Corridor said that they hoped it would
be open this Sunday she said that
Palestinians need all our help uh the
humanitarian situ ation is dire and that
people are desperate for basic needs she
said they were facing a humanitarian
catastrophe and she said the key aim was
to get Aid in and she outlined the
difficulties that we know that has been
happening by Road and that is why they
have turned to Cyprus the UK the UAE and
the US and others to bring humanitarian
Aid in by sea she said it would see
significant amounts of Aid being brought
in as I said she said that they hope to
open that this Sunday although a pilot
operation will start today as you heard
she thanked the President of Cyprus and
also the president of the United Arab
Emirates for helping to get this
Maritime Corridor up and running she
called on everyone to help deliver it
saying that it can make a real
difference for Palestinians at the end
she also again called for that
humanitarian pause in the fighting and
eventually a ceasefire she also again re
itated the call for all the hostages
being held to be released the President
of Cyprus who you saw there said that
they were United in the common vision of
bringing Aid into Gaza he added that our
journey was only just beginning let's go
straight to yolan Nell who is our Middle
East correspondent in Jerusalem so
yoland it is all coming together we had
President Biden talking about this port
we then had Lord Cameron the British
foreign secretary saying the UK would be
involved and and now we've got the full
details from the EU commission president
and the President of
Cyprus that's right and actually it's a
couple of months ago that we really
started hearing a lot more from Cyprus
about this proposed uh SE rout to bring
in aids to Gaza and Britain has shown a
lot of interest in that uh Lord Cameron
in particular uh prior to this
announcement by the US what's really new
now is the time frame that's being
brought on this um new kind of emphasis
on the project as a way of hurry in Aid
uh into Gaza and it comes after Lord
Cameron that the foreign secretary had
said that really Israel's allies were
losing patience there have been calls
now for for some weeks for an increase
in the flow of Aid we've got the UN
warning of mass starvation in Gaza so
this looks like a plan now that could be
in place potentially for the start of
the Islamic holy month of
Ramadan and as the are the Israelis as
far as we know going to cooperate with
this ins Cyprus and what role will they
have in checking all of that
Aid well the idea as we understand it is
that there would be a screening process
that could take place uh in Cyprus um
with Israel overseeing that and actually
um we already had a couple of months ago
um one of the Israeli ministers in
Cyprus looking at a test of a screening
process there uh but then we didn't hear
too much more about it so the idea seems
to be that this is coordin ated with the
Israelis um and then the aid is brought
in once it's been screened U into Gaza
there isn't a deep sea port in Gaza so
what we're looking at here is the
construction of some kind of temporary
Pier now it's not been made clear and
the logistics of that or how Aid will be
stored in Gaza how it will be
distributed afterwards um it seems
perhaps private contractors uh the UN
might be involved uh but a lot more
details still to come on this um but
what is clear is there's a lot of
coordination a lot of enthusiasm uh for
this de deal it looks like some kind of
concrete step uh for all these different
players in the region in Europe in the
US uh something they've been looking for
to try to have a positive announcement
really especially after we've had in in
past days um the failure of truce talks
uh in Cairo through Egyptian mediators
with a Hamas delegation to achieve some
kind of breakthrough to have a Tru steel
which would allow um in Ramadan as had
been hoped a big surge Aid going into
Gaza uh in exchange for Israeli hostages
coming out and also Palestinian
prisoners being freed from Israeli jails
those talks will still continue but this
is another initiative that can be taken
in parallel yolan Nel in Jerusalem thank
you very much I know you'll go off to
try and get more details of how this
Corridor will work